IV.i.256 (477,5)

  If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
  Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile]

If womens tears could impregnate the earth. By the doctrine of equivocal
generation, new animals were supposed producible by new combinations of
matter. See Bacon.

IV.i.277 (478,7)

        whose solid virtue
  The shot of accident, nor dart of chance,
  Could neither graze nor pierce]

[T: of change] To _graze_ is not merely to touch superficially, but to
strike not directly, not so as to bury the body of the thing striking in
the matter struck.

Theobald trifles, as is usual. _Accident_ and _chance_ may admit a
subtle distinction; _accident_ may be considered as the _act_, and
_chance_ as the _power_ or _agency_ of fortune; as, _It was_ by chance
_that this_ accident _befel me_. At least, if we suppose all corrupt
that is inaccurate, there will be no end of emendation.

IV.ii.57 (482,1) garner'd up my heart] That is, _treasured_ up; the
_garner_ and the _fountain_ are improperly conjoined.

IV.ii.62 (482,2)

  Turn thy complexion there!
  Patience, thou young and rose-lipp'd cherubim;
  Ay, there, look grim as hell]

At such an object do thou, _patience_, thyself _change colour_; at this
do thou, even thou, _rosy cherub_ as thou art, _look grim as hell_. The
old editions and the new have it,

  _I here look grim as hell._

_I_ was written for _ay_, and not since corrected.

IV.ii.109 (484,4) The small'st opinion on my great'st abuse] The old
quarto reads [for "least misuse"],

  _The small'st opinion on my_ great'st abuse.

Which I think is better.

IV.ii.140 (486,6) Some base notorious knave] For _gross_, not in its
proper meaning for _known_.

IV.ii.144 (486,7) Speak within door] Do not clamour so as to be heard
beyond the house.

IV.ii.146 (486,8) the seamy side without] That is, _inside out_.

IV.iii.27 (490,2) and he, she lov'd, prov'd mad,/And did forsake her] I
believe that _mad_ only signifies _wild, frantick, uncertain_.

IV.iii.31 (490,3) I have much to do,/But to go hang my head] I _have
much_ ado to do any thing _but hang my head_. We might read,

  Not _to go hang my head_.

This is perhaps the only insertion made in the latter editions which has
improved the play. The rest seem to have been added for the sake of
amplification, or of ornament. When the imagination had subsided, and
the mind was no longer agitated by the horror of the action, it became
at leisure to look round for specious additians. This addition is
natural. Desdemona can at first hardly forbear to sing the song; she
endeavours to change her train of thoughts, but her imagination at last
prevails, and she sings it.

IV.iii.41 (491,4)

  _Des._ "The poor soul sat singing by a sycamore-tree,
  "Sing all a green willow]

This song, in two parts, is printed in a late collection of old ballads;
the lines preserved here differ somewhat from the copy discovered by the
ingenious collector.

IV.iii.55 (491,5)

  _Des._ "I call'd my love false love; but what said
  "he then?
  "Sing willow, &c.]

This couplet is not in the ballad, which is the complaint, not of a
woman forsaken, but of a man rejected. These lines were probably added
when it was accommodated to a woman.

IV.iii.94 (493,6) our former having] Our former allowance of experience.

IV.iii.107 (493,7) heaven me such usage send] --_heaven me such_ uses
_send_,] Such is the reading of the folio, and of the subsequent
editions; but the old quarto has,

  --_such_ usage _send_.--

_Usage_ is an old word for _custom_, and, I think, better than _uses_.

V.i.11 (494,1) I have rubb'd this young quat _almost to the sense_] In
some editions,

  _I've rubb'd this young_ gnat _almost to the sense,
  And he grows angry_.]

This is a passage much controverted among the editors. Sir T. Hanner
reads _quab_, a _gudgeon_; not that a gudgeon can be _rubbed_ to much
_sense_, but that a man grossly deceived is often called a _gudgeon_.
Mr. Upton reads _quail_, which he proves, by much learning, to be a very
choleric bird. Dr. Warburton retains _gnat_, which is found in the early
quarto. Theobald would introduce _knot_, a small bird of that name. I
have followed the text of the folio, and third and fourth quartos.

A _quat_ in the midland counties is a _pimple_, which by rubbing is made
to smart, or is _rubbed to sense_. Roderigo is called a _quat_ by the
same mode of speech, as a low fellow is now termed in lay language a
_scab. To rub to the sense_, is _to rub to the quick_.

V.i.37 (496,2) No passage?] No passengers? No body going by?

V.i.42 (499,4) a heary night] A _thick cloudy_ night, in which an ambush
may be commodiously laid.

V.ii.1 (499,4) It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul;--/Let me not
name it] The abruptness of this soliloquy makes it obscure. The meaning,
I think, is this: "I am here (says Othello in his mind) overwhelmed with
horror. What is the reason of this perturbation? Is it want of
resolution to do justice? Is it the dread of shedding blood? No; it is
not the action that shocks me, but _it is the cause, it is the cause, my
soul; let me not name it to you, ye chaste stars; it is the cause_."

V.ii.20 (500,7)

        I must weep,
  But they are cruel tears: this sorrel's heavenly;
  It strikes, where it doth love.--She wakes--]

This tenderness, with which I lament the punishment which justice
compels me to inflict, is a holy passion.

I wish these two lines could be honestly ejected. It is the fate of
Shakespeare to counteract his own pathos.

V.ii.65 (502,8) A murder, which I thought a sacrifice] This line is
difficult. _Thou hast hardened my heart, and makest me_ kill thee with
the rage of a _murderer_, when _I thought to have sacrificed_ thee to
justice with the calmness of a priest striking a victim.

It must not be omitted, that one of the elder quartos reads, _thou dost
stone_ thy _heart_; which I suspect to be genuine. The meaning then will
be, _thou forcest me_ to dismiss thee from the world in the state of the
_murdered_ without preparation for death, _when I intended_ that thy
punishment should have been a _sacrifice_ atoning for thy crime.

I am glad that I have ended my revisal of this dreadful scene. It is not
to be endured.
