
II.ii.58 (48,4) And the will dotes that is inclinable] [Old edition, not
so well, has it, _attributive_. POPE.] By the old edition Mr. Pope means
the old quarto. The folio has, as it stands, _inclinable_.--I think the
first reading better; _the will dotes that attributes_ or gives _the
qualities which it affects_; that first causes excellence, and then
admires it.

II.ii.60 (48,5) Without some image of the affected merit] The present
reading is right. The will _affects_ an object for some supposed
_merit_, which Hector says, is uncensurable, unless the _merit_ so
_affected_ be really there.

II.ii.71 (48,7) unrespective sieve] That is, into a _common voider_.
_Sieve_ is in the quarto. The folio reads,

  --unrespective _fame_;

for which the modern editions have silently printed,

  --unrespective _place_.

II.ii.88 (49,9)

        why do you now
  The issue of your proper wisdoms rate;
  And do a deed that fortune never did,
  Beggar that estimation which you priz'd
  Richer than sea and land?]

If I understand this passage, the meaning is, "Why do you, by censuring
the determination of your own wisdoms, degrade Helen, whom fortune has
not yet deprived of her value, or against whom, as the wife of Paris,
fortune has not in this war so declared, as to make us value her less?"
This is very harsh, and much strained.

II.ii.122 (50,2) her brain-sick raptures/Cannot distaste the goodness of
a quarrel] Corrupt; change to a worse state.

II.ii.179 (52,3) benummed wills] That is, inflexible, inmoveable, no
longer obedient to superior direction.

II.ii.180 (52,4) There is a law in each well-ordered nation] What the
law does in every nation between individuals, justice ought to do
between nations.

II.ii.188 (52,5) Hector's opinion/Is this in way of truth] Though
considering _truth_ and _justice_ in this question, this is my opinion;
yet as a question of honour, I think on it as you.

II.ii.196 (53,6) the performance of our heaving spleens] The execution
of spite and resentment.

II.ii.212 (53,7) emulation] That is, envy, factious contention.

II.iii.18 (54,8) without drawing the massy iron and cutting the web]
That is, _without drawing their swords to cut the web_. They use no
means but those of violence.

II.iii.55 (55,1) decline the whole question] Deduce the question from
the first case to the last.

II.iii.108 (57,6) but it was a strong composure, a fool could disunite]
So reads the quarto very properly; but the folio, which the moderns have
followed, has, _it was a strong_ COUNSEL.

II.iii.118 (57,7) noble state] Person of high dignity; spoken of
Agamemnon.

II.iii.137 (58,8) under-write] To _subscribe_, in Shakespeare, is to
_obey_.

II.iii.215 (60,2) pheese his pride] To _pheese_ is to _comb_ or _curry_.

II.iii.217 (60,3) Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel] Not for
the value of all for which we are fighting.

II.iii.267 (62,6)

  _Ajax._ Shall I call you father?
  _Nest._ Ay, my good son]

In the folio and in the nodern editions Ajax desires to give the title
of _father_ to Ulysses; in the quarto, more naturally, to Nestor.

III.i.35 (64,1) love's invisible soul] _love's_ visible _soul_.] So
HANMER. The other editions have _invisible_, which perhaps may be right,
and may mean the _soul of love_ invisible every where else.

III.i.83 (65,3) And, my lord, he desires you] Here I think the speech of
Pandarus should begin, and the rest of it should be added to that of
Helen, but I have followed the copies.

III.i.96 (65,4) with my disposer Cressida] [W: dispouser] I do not
understand the word _disposer_, nor know what to substitute in its
place. There is no variation in the copies.

III.i.132 (67,6) _Yet that which seems the wound to kill_] _To kill the
wound_ is no very intelligible expression, nor is the measure preserved.
We might read,

    _These lovers cry,
    Oh! oh! they die!_
  But _that which seems to kill,
    Doth turn_, &c.
  _So dying love lives still_.

Yet as _the wound to kill_ may mean _the wound that seems mortal_, I
alter nothing.

III.ii.25 (69,1) tun'd too sharp in sweetness]--and _too sharp in
sweetness_,] So the folio and all modern editions; but the quarto more
accurately,

  --_tun'd_ too sharp in sweetness.

III.ii.99 (71,4) our head shall go bare, 'till merit crown it] I cannot
forbear to observe, that the quarto reads thus: _Our head shall go bare,
'till merit_ lower part no affection, _in reversion_, &c. Had there been
no other copy, hov could this have been corrected? The true reading is
in the folio.

III.ii.102 (72,5) his addition shall be humble] We will give him no high
or pompous titles.

III.ii.162 (74,6)

        but you are wise,
  Or else you love not; to be wise and love,
  Exceeds man's might]

I read,

  --but _we're not_ wise,
  Or else _we_ love not; to be wise and love,
  Exceeds man's might;--

Cressida, in return to the praise given by Troilus to her wisdom,
replies, "That lovers are never wise; that it is beyond the power of man
to bring love and wisdom to an union."

III.ii.173 (74,8) Might be affronted with the match] I wish "my
integrity might be met and matched with such equality and force of pure
unmingled love."

III.ii.184 (75,2) As true as steel, as plantage to the moon] _Plantage_
is not, I believe, a general term, but the herb which we now call
_plantain_, in Latin, _plantago_, which was, I suppose, imagined to be
under the peculiar influence of the moon.

III.ii.187 (76,3)

  Yet after all comparisons of truth,
  As truth's authentic author to be cited
  _As true as Troilus_, shall crown up the verse]

Troilus shall _crown the verse_, as a man _to be cited as the authentic
author of truth_; as one whose protestations were true to a proverb.

III.iii.1-16 (77,5) Now, princes, for the service I have done you] I am
afraid, that after all the learned commentator's [Warburton's] efforts
to clear the argument of Calchas, it will still appear liable to
objection; nor do I discover more to be urged in his defence, than that
though his skill in divination determined him to leave Troy, jet that he
joined himself to Agamemnon and his army by unconstrained good-will; and
though he came as a fugitive escaping from destruction, yet his services
after his reception, being voluntary and important, deserved reward.
This argument is not regularly and distinctly deduced, but this is, I
think, the best explication that it will yet admit.

