

_important part played by aesthetic feeling in the enrichment of
Japanese life. Among Japanese of all classes, an instinctive awareness
of beauty seems to compensate for a standard of well-being which to
Western judgement seems poor and bleak. Their habit of finding pleasure
in common things, their quick appreciation of form and color, their
feelings for simple elegance, are gifts which may well be envied by us
who depend so much for our happiness upon quantity of possessions and
complexity of apparatus. Such happy conditions, in which frugality is
not the enemy of satisfaction, are perhaps the most distinctive
features in the cultural history of Japan.4

_

Zen culture, working with the already highly developed vocabulary and
capacity for perception developed in the Heian era, unlocked powerful
new techniques that have made Japanese culture a special case in the
annals of world civilization. Perhaps the best case in point is the
stone garden at Ryoan-ji, which is a triumph of pure suggestiveness. It
is clearly a symbol--but a symbol of what? It is clearly an invitation
to open one's perception--but open it to what? The work gives no hint.
With Ryoan-ji Zen artists finally perfected the device of
suggestiveness to the point where it could stand on its own. The garden
seems almost to be a natural object, like a sunset or a piece of
driftwood. The impact of a traditional Zen room is similar. It simply
amplifies whatever powers of understanding the viewer already
possesses. Of itself it is a void.

By relying so strongly on perception, the Japanese have created a
strikingly original way of using and experiencing art. Western critics
for several hundred years have argued about the function of art, the
responsibilities of the audience vis-Ã -vis a work of art, the varying
types of perception, and so on, but they have never dealt with the
peculiar phenomenon of Zen art, where the work can be merely a device
to start the mind going. How do you write a critical analysis of a work
of art that only takes shape after it gets inside your head? It is
interesting to watch critic after critic struggling with Ryoan-ji,
trying to explain its power, only to collapse at last in defeat.5
Similarly, the most effective Haiku are those about which the least can
be said. Ryoan-ji takes your breath away when you first see it; like a
good Haiku it slams you against a moment of direct experience. Yet when
you try to analyze it, you find there is nothing significant to say.
Ryoan-ji may not even be a work of art by our Western definition; it
may be some sort of mind device for which we have no word. Similarly,
Haiku's relation to Western poetry may be limited to typography. The
arts of the West--painting, poetry, drama, literature, sculpture--are all
enhanced by critical analysis. When we speak of Milton, we really speak
of Milton as seen through many layers of critical explanation and
interpretation. The Zen arts have inspired no such body of critical
analysis, perhaps because they do not have many of those qualities we
normally think of as aesthetic. Does Ryoan-ji have beauty in any
conventional sense? It merely exists. It is, if anything, anti-art.

If we in the West wish to borrow from the complex world of Zen culture,
we must first begin to train and intensify our powers of perception. In
this regard, one is tempted to speculate that the Japanese must have
learned to turn these powers down as well as up. How else can one
explain the Japanese ability to ignore so much of the blight of modern
civilization while maintaining a national fetish for such purely
aesthetic phenomena as cherry blossoms? As Donald Richie observed,
"Japan is the most modern of all countries perhaps because, having a
full and secure past, it can afford to live in the instantaneous
present."0 Alongside all the aesthetic indignities of the twentieth
century, the ancient sense of taste appears to have survived
undiminished. A concern for beauty is still very much a part of
everyday life in Japan. Whereas the appreciation of art is usually the
pursuit of a privileged few in Western countries, in Japan the
aesthetic quality of everyday objects is commonly acknowledged to be
fully as important as their function. It is not uncommon to discover a
rustic day laborer arranging flowers, practicing the tea ceremony, or
fashioning a garden in his spare time. The peasant may be as sure a
judge of tea bowls as the prince. Even the match boxes from the
sleaziest bars are minor works of art, as are bundles and packages from
even the most modern commercial establishments. A sense of beauty is
not considered unmanly; indeed, it is regarded as essential to the good
life, harking all the way back to the virile _samurai_.

         Zen culture's primary lesson is that we should start trying to
experience art and the world around us rather than analyzing

them. When we do this, we find that everything suddenly comes alive. If
we can take this power of direct perception, sharpened by the devices
of Zen art, back to everyday activities, we will find a beauty in
common objects that we previously ignored. Flowers--indeed individual
petals--become objects of the most intense loveliness. When we see the
world with a Zen-honed awareness, our sense of the beauty in objects
supplants our desire to possess them. If we allow the ancient creators
of Zen culture to touch our lives, we open wider the doors of
perception.



                                             *       *       *

