III.iii.4 (78,6) through the sight I bear in things, to Jove] This
passage in all the modern editions is silently depraved, and printed
thus:

  --through the sight I bear in things to come.

The word is so printed that nothing but the sense can determine whether
it be _love_ or _Jove_. I believe that the editors read it as _love_,
and therefore made the alteration to obtain some meaning.

III.iii.28 (79,7)

  he shall buy my daughter; and her presence
  Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
  In most accepted pain]

Sir T. HANMER, and Dr. WARBURTON after him, read,

  In most accepted _pay_.

They do not seem to understand the construction of the passage. _Her
presence_, says Calchas, shall strike off, or recompence _the service I
have done_, even in these _labours_ which were _most accepted_.

III.iii.44 (80,8) derision med'cinable] All the modern editions have
_decision_. The old copies are apparently right. The folio in this place
agrees with the quarto, so that the corruption was at first merely
accidental.

III.iii.96 (82,9) how dearly ever parted] I do not think that in the
word _parted_ is included any idea of _division_; it means, _however
excellently endowed_, with however _dear_ or precious _parts_ enriched
or adorned.

III.iii.113 (82,2) but the author's drift:/Who, in his circumstance] In
the detail or circumduction of his argument.

III.iii.125 (83,3) The unknovn Ajax] Ajax, who has abilities which were
never brought into view or use.

III.iii.134 (83,4)

  How some men creep in skittish Fortune's hall,
  While others play the idiots in her eyes!]

To _creep_ is to _keep out of sight_ from whatever motive. Some men
_keep out of notice in the hall of Fortune_, while others, though they
but _play the idiot_, are always _in her eye_, in the way of
distinction.

III.iii.137 (83,5) feasting] Folio. The quarto has _fasting_. Either
word may bear a good sense.

III.iii.145 (84,6) Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back] This speech
is printed in all the modern editions with such deviations from the old
copy, as exceed the lawful power of an editor.

III.iii.171 (85,2) for beauty, wit,/High birth, vigour of bone, desert
in service] The modern editors read,

  For beauty, wit, high birth, desert in service, &c.

I do not deny but the changes produce a more easy lapse of numbers, but
they do not exhibit the work of Shakespeare, (see 1765, VII, 435, 2)

III.iii.178 (85,3)

  And shew to dust, that is a little gilt,
  More laud than gilt o'er-dusted]

[T: give to ... laud than they will give to gold] This emendation has
been received by the succeeding editors, but recedes too far from the
copy. There is no other corruption than such as Shakespeare's
incorrectness often resembles. He has omitted the article _to_ in the
second line: he should have written,

  _More laud than_ to _gilt o'er-dusted_. (1773) (rev. 1778, IX, 93, 7)

III.iii.189 (86,4) Made emulous missions] The meaning of _mission_ seems
to be _dispatches_ of the gods _from heaven_ about mortal business, such
as often happened at the siege of Troy.

III.iii.197 (86,5) Knows almost every grain of Pluto's gold] For this
elegant line the quarto has only,

  Knows almost every _thing_.

III.iii.201 (86,7) (with which relation/Durst never meddle)] There is a
secret administration of affairs, which no _history_ was ever able to
discover.

III.iii.230 (87,9)

  Omission to do what is necessary
  Seals a commission to a blank of danger]

By _neglecting_ our duty we _commission_ or enable that _danger_ of
dishonour, which could not reach us before, to lay hold upon us.

III.iii.254 (88,1) with a politic regard] With a _sly look_.

IV.i.11 (91,1) During all question of the gentle truce] I once thought
to read,

  During all _quiet_ of the gentle truce.

But I think _question_ means intercourse, interchange of conversation.

IV.i.36 (92,4) His purpose meets you] I bring you his meaning and his
orders.

IV.i.65 (93,6)

  Both merits pois'd, each weighs no less nor more,
  But he as he, the heavier for a whore]

I read,

  But he as he, _each_ heavier for a whore.

_Heavy_ is taken both for _weighty_, and for _sad_ or _miserable_. The
quarto reads,

  But he as he, _the_ heavier for a whore.

I know not whether the thought is not that of a wager. It must then be
read thus:

  But he as he. Which heavier for a whore?

That is, _for a whore_ staked down, _which is the heavier_.

IV.i.78 (94,7) We'll not commend what we intend to sell] I believe the
meaning is only this: though you practise the buyer's art, we will not
practise the seller's. We intend to sell Helen dear, yet will not
commend her.

IV.ii.62 (96,4) My matter is so rash] My business is so _hasty_ and so
abrupt.

IV.ii.74 (97,6) the secrets of neighbour Pandar] [Pope had emended the
Folio's "secrets of nature" to the present reading] Mr. Pope's reading
is in the old quarto. So great is the necessity of collation.

IV.iv.3 (99,1) The grief] The folio reads,

  The grief is fine, full perfect, that I taste,
  And no less in a sense as strong
  As that which causeth it.--

The quarto otherwise,

  The grief is fine, full, perfect, that I taste,
  And _violenteth_ in a sense as strong
  As that which causeth it.--

_Violenteth_ is a word with which I am not acquainted, yet perhaps it
may be right. The reading of the text is without authority.

IV.iv.65 (101,3) For I will throw my glove to death] That is, I will
_challenge_ death himself in defence of thy fidelity.

IV.iv.105 (103,5)

  While others fish, with craft, for great opinion,
  I, with great truth, catch mere simplicity.]

The meaning, I think, is, _while others_, by their art, gain high
estimation, I, by honesty, obtain a plain simple approbation.

IV.iv.109 (103,6) the moral of my wit/Is, _plain and true_] That is, the
_governing principle of my understanding_; but I rather think we should
read,

  --the _motto_ of my wit
  Is, plain and true,--

IV.iv.114 (103,7) possess thee what she is] I will _make thee fully
understand_. This sense of the word _possess_ is frequent in our author.

IV.iv.134 (104,9) I'll answer to my list] This, I think, is right,
though both the old copies read _lust_.

IV.v.8 (105,1) bias cheek] Swelling out like the bias of a bowl.
