
The _shinden_ style suppressed for a time the indigenous affection for
simplicity and unadorned natural materials revealed in the earlier,
pre-Heian dwellings. However, it was never really naturalized, and it
was eventually to be remembered in Japan's architectural history
largely as an aberrant interlude, whose major legacy was the sense of
openness or fluid space in the classic Zen house.

When the _samurai _warriors of the Kamakura era (1185-- 1333) assumed
power, they did not immediately disown the architectural styles of the
Heian nobles, but merely added (or, in some cases, removed) features in
response to their martial needs and their new Zen outlook. As the
country was at war, there was no logic in detached rooms and open
galleries, and the _samurai _immediately tightened up the design,
putting the entire house under one roof. They eliminated the pond and
added a surrounding board fence for protection, even as interior
curtains and hinged doors were replaced by sliding doors of paper over
a wooden frame. And as rooms became more clearly identified, they were
defined in terms of function. The early influence of Zen was seen most
noticeably in the gradual disappearance of the ornamental aspects of
_shinden _design as the _samurai _came to prize austerity and
frugality.

During the Ashikaga era (1333-1573) which followed, when Zen monks
assumed the role of advisers and scribes for the illiterate military
rulers, a special writing desk, called a _shoin_,

appeared in the houses of the more influential _samurai_. The _shoin
_was a window alcove with a raised sill, which overlooked a private
garden and was used by the monks for reading and writing. Next to this
was a _chigai-dana_, a wall cabinet recessed in a niche and used for
storing papers and writing, utensils. (These new domestic appointments
had been lifted by the Zen monks directly from the chief abbot's study
in Chinese Ch'an monasteries.) The _shoin _study room immediately
became a focus of fashion among the _samurai_, even those who could
neither read nor write, and before long it was the finest room in a
house. Guests began to be received there and another feature from Zen
monasteries was added: the art-display alcove, or tokonoma. (In Chinese
Ch'an monasteries the _tokonoma _was a special shrine before which
monks burned incense, drank ceremonial tea, and contemplated religious
artwork. That such a shrine should appear in a reception room of a
social-climbing _samurai_'s house is vivid testimony to the pervasive
influence of the Zen monk advisers.) The _samurai_ also added an entry
vestibule called a _genkan_, still another feature drawn from Zen
temples. As a result of all these additions and modifications,
_shinden_ architecture was completely transformed into a functional
_samurai _house whose style became known as _shoin_. Forgotten were the
Chinese tile roofs and vermilion paint; thatch and unfinished woods
reappeared. Paradoxically, the supplanting of _shinden _design by
_shoin _was in many ways merely the ousting of a T'ang Chinese style by
a Sung Chinese style. However, the T'ang architecture had been that of
the Chinese court, whereas the Sung was drawn from Ch'an monasteries
and coincidentally contained many of the aesthetic ideals of the
earlier native Japanese dwellings and shrines.

By the waning years of the Ashikaga era, the _shoin _design had
influenced virtually every aspect of Japanese architecture, bringing
into being almost all the qualities of what is now thought of as the
traditional Japanese house. The movable floor mats were replaced by
wall-to-wall _tatami_, woven straw mats bound with a dark fabric band
at either end and standardized to a size of approximately three by six
feet. Soon rooms were being defined in terms of the number of _tatami
_required for the floor--and modular architecture had been invented.
Sliding, but removable paper partitions called _fusuma_ became the
standard room dividers, and the _tokonoma_ became less a religious
shrine than a secular display case where vertical monochrome scrolls
and flower arrangements were put on view. Oddly enough, one of the few
Chinese innovations the Japanese persistently chose to ignore was the
chair. As a result, a Japanese residence has always maintained an entry
vestibule where footwear is removed, something unnecessary for the
Chinese, who had no reason to consider the floor a couch and could keep
their shoes on. One important side effect of this choice is that eye
level in the Japanese room--that is, the level from which the room, its
art, and its appointments are viewed--has remained significantly lower
than in houses with furniture, a characteristic that influences the
placement of art as well as the layout of the accompanying garden.

The culminating style of Japanese architecture was the sukiya house,
essentially a free-hand rendering of the formal _samurai shoin_. The
_sukiya_ style reflected a number of aesthetic and architectural ideas
embodied in the Zen-inspired Japanese teahouse, and it allowed for
considerable experimentation with materials and design. Less powerful
and more delicate than the _shoin_, it was in many ways the ultimate
extension of Zen austerity, even to the point where walls were often
left unplastered. The _shoin_ had been the house of warriors; the
_sukiya _was a style for the common man and as such has contributed
significantly to the overall tradition of Japanese architecture.
_Shoin_ and _sukiya _houses, heirs to the legacy of Zen monks and later
Zen aesthetes, are the reference point for what is now understood to be
the traditional Japanese dwelling.

The deceptively fragile appearance of the house makes it appear at
first an impractical invention for a land faced with recurrent
earthquakes. Yet its lightness and flexibility, like those of a judo
expert, actually contribute to its safety. Part of the reason is its
foundation, which "floats" with the earth rather than being anchored
rigidly. The traditional house is not held up by walls but by stout
columns, almost a half-foot in diameter, embedded at their base in
niches sunk into large, individually placed stones which are only
partially buried. These columns reach through the house to the ceiling,
whose weight secures them in their precarious foundation. In ordinary
houses, the roof is a steeply sloping, four-sided pyramid whose light
underframe is covered with multiple layers of shingles made from the
tough bark of the _hinoki_ tree.
